# Operators and Expressions

This section discusses operators and expressions.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Operators

Operators are special symbols which produce some result given 1, 2, or 3
values.  They are usually similar to the operators you would see on a four
function calculator, for example `+ - * /` are all operators in C, and they
behave similar to how you might expect.

### Addition (`+`)

This is an example of a addition of two integers:

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    int a = 3;
    int b = 4;
    int c = a + b;
    printf("%d + %d = %d\n", a, b, c);
}
```
```
3 + 4 = 7
```

Pretty straightforward right?  Ok, let's look at one more example

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    short a = 30000;
    short b = 30000;
    short c = a + b;
    printf("%d + %d = %d\n", a, b, c);
}
```
```
30000 + 30000 = -5536
```

Huh...  That's weird.

### Overflow

You should remember from the last section that short integers typically can't
hold values greater than `32,767`.  Here we tried to add two short integers to
a value larger than the maximum.  C does not cause any errors in this case, it
merely plays along, and adds them as it would normally.  Except in this case,
there is a carry at the end that the variable simply as no space for, and it
discards it.  This is called overflow.  You should notice then that the result
isn't completely random.  The result is what happens when you add the numbers
normally, except that past 32,767 it loops around to `-32,768`.  However, this
is not strictly defined in the standard, and a different compiler on a
different machine may produce a different result!  So if you are trying to
write very safe code, you need to be very careful, and avoid overflow from
happening in the first place.

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    short a = 32767;
    short b = 1;
    short c = a + b;
    printf("%d + %d = %d\n", a, b, c);
}
```
```
32767 + 1 = -32768
```

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    short a = 32767;
    short b = 32767;
    short c = a + b;
    printf("%d + %d = %d\n", a, b, c);
}
```
```
32767 + 32767 = -2
```

In this course, it will generally be okay to use long integers and hope for the
best.

**Question: Can you write code to check if an overflow will occur before
actually performing an addition?**

### Multiplication (`*`)

This is an example of a multiplication of two integers:

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    int a = 3;
    int b = 4;
    int c = a*a + b*b;
    printf("%d*%d + %d*%d = %d\n", a, a, b, b, c);
}
```
```
3*3 + 4*4 = 25
```

As mentioned in the previous section, overflow is still an issue, and it is
even easier to overflow with multiplication.

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    short int a = 300;
    short int b = 400;
    short int c = a*a + b*b;
    printf("%d*%d + %d*%d = %d\n", a, a, b, b, c);
}
```
```
300*300 + 400*400 = -12144
```

**Question: In general, what is the maximum number of bits you would need to
store the product of two N-bit numbers? Hint: How about for N-digit decimal
numbers?**

Multiplication of floating point numbers is similar.  While overflow is still a
possibility, it is less of a concern due to the large range of floating point
numbers.

### Division (`*`)

This is an example of division for two integers:

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    int dividend = 30;
    int divisor = 4;
    int quotient = dividend / divisor;
    int remaining = dividend - quotient * divisor;
    printf("%d / %d = %d\n", dividend, divisor, quotient);
    printf("%d = %d * %d + %d\n", dividend, divisor, quotient, remaining);
}
```
```
30 / 4 = 7
30 = 4 * 7 + 2
```

Note that if you divide two integers, the result itself is an integer, even
if the numbers do not divide evenly.  To find the remainder, subtract the
product of the divisor and the quotient from the dividend as in the code above.

This is an example of division for two floating point numbers:

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* printf */

int main() {
    float dividend = 77777.0;
    float divisor = 7.0;
    float quotient_a = dividend / divisor;
    float inverse = 1.0 / divisor;
    float quotient_b = dividend * inverse;
    printf("%.10f vs. \n%.10f\n", quotient_a, quotient_b);
}
```
```
11111.0000000000 vs. 
11111.0009765625
```

Huh...  That's weird.

### Floating Point Precision

You can see a strange result.  Even though the two quotients we produce here
should be mathematically they same, they differ.  The reason for this is that
in the second case, we try to store the value `1.0/77777.0`, but this number
is not representable in our format, similar to how `1/7` is not representable
in the decimal format without an infinite number of digits.

This shows an an important lesson: you should generally not check to see if
two floating point numbers are equal, but just that they are close enough, or
if their difference is small.
