# Variables, Types, Operators, Expressions

This section discusses variables, types, operators, and expressions.  These
concepts are fundamental to most programming languages.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Variables

Variables are a fundamental unit of computing.  They are similar, though not
exactly the same as variables from mathematics.  In mathematics, a variable
might be used to represent some unknown.  For example, given an equation, solve
for the variable x.

In computing, on the other hand, the value of a variable
must always be known.  It is only a way of attaching a name to data.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In C, all variables must be declared before being used.  This is an example of
several valid declarations in C.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/variables.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here are some examples of declarations that are NOT valid.  Any program
including any of these would fail to compile.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/invalid.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Basically, your variable can be any permutation of letters, digits, and
underscores, so long as it does not start with a digit, and it is not a
reserved word.  The reserved words of C are shown here.  They all have
special functions which we will learn about later.

```
break else long switch case enum register typedef char extern return union
const float short unsigned continue for signed void default goto sizeof
volatile do if static while
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this gives us a lot of possibilities, you should always ask whether you
should before you ask whether you can.  What follows is a quote from "The C
Programming Language" by Brian Kerninghan and Dennis Ritchie.

*It’s wise to choose variable names that are related to the purpose of the
variable, and that are unlikely to get mixed up typographically. We tend to use
short names for local variables, especially loop indices, and longer names for
external variables*

Naming is mundane, but extremely important in all of programming.  You should
err on the side of caution toward longer more descriptive variable names.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Types

Types are almost as prevalent as variables in programming.  In C, every
variable has a type.  It is there for your own safety, to ensure that you only
do things that you are allowed to do with the data stored in a variable.

Please note that many types do not have standard definition in terms of the
amount of storage provided for them.  In the following descriptions, I will do
my best to tell you the most restrictve scenario, which is typically what you
should design for if you want your program to work across multiple systems.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are quite few types in C, making it easy to learn all of them.  The
fundamental types are: char, int, float, and double.

* char
* int
* float
* double

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Chars

A char represents a character, like 'A', '0' or hyphen for example.  Note that
if they are declared with a value, that value must be surrounded with single
quotes, not double quotes.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/chars.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Ints

An int is used to represent an integer like -30, 12 or 1e5.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ints.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Floats

A float is used to represent non integer numbers like -2.7, 5.3, or 2e-6

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/floats.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Doubles

Finally, a double is like a float but it is more precise and takes up more
space.  We will look at the difference in more depth shortly.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/doubles.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Type Modifiers

Type modifiers allow us to give more detail as to how we want our variable
to be treated and how much space we get for it.  The type modifiers in C
are short, long, signed, and unsigned.

* short
* long
* signed
* unsigned

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some examples of valid usage are given here.  They can be used by placing them
before the type, and other modifiers, but not every modifier is applicable to
every type.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/modifiers.c"}
```
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### Signed and Unsigned

The signed and unsigned modifiers can be applied only to chars and integers.
Signed means that the value can be negative, and unsigned means it can only be
positive.  By default chars can be either signed or unsigned depending on the
machine.  However, integers are always signed by default.

A char is always one byte, or 8 bits.  Therefore, Unsigned chars can hold
values in the range of 0 to 255, while signed chars can hold values on the
range of -127 to 127.

Signed integers have at least 2 bytes or 16 bits.  Therefore, they can hold
values at least in the range of -32,767 to 32,767.  Unsigned integers have the
same nubmer of bits and therefore can store any value in the range of 0 to
65,635.

|      | bits | signed          | unsigned   |
|------|------|-----------------|------------|
| char | 8    | [-128, 127]     | [0, 255]   |
| int  | 16   | [-32768, 32767] | [0, 65635] |

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/signed_vs_unsigned.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### Short and Long

The short and long modifiers can be applied only to integers and doubles,
though a long double is relatively rare.  Note that in the case of integers,
one may apply the long modifier up to two times, and combine it with the signed
or unsigned modifiers.

Short integers have at least 2 bytes and are guaranteed to have equal or fewer
bytes than an int.  This means that short integers can hold values at least in
the range -32,767 to 32,767.  Long integers have at least 4 bytes, and long
long integers have at least 8 bytes.  The resulting maximum values are shown
in the table.

Finally, a long double typically has more precision than a double, but the
exact size is not specified in the C standard.  This means it is implementation
dependent but typically ranges from 10 to 16 bytes.  The math for determining
its range is harder than the math for integers, and we won't go through it
here.

|               | bits | min value            | max value           | smallest difference |
|---------------|------|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| short int     | 16   | -32768               | 32767               | 1                   |
| long int      | 32   | -2147483647          | 2147483647          | 1                   |
| long long int | 64   | -9223372036854775807 | 9223372036854775807 | 1                   |
| long double   | 128  | -1.18973e+4932       | 1.18973e+4932       | 1.0842e-19          |

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/short_vs_long.c"}
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Conclusion

This is a lot to information to absorb.  Lucky for you, all of this information
is built into the C language itself.  Use the built in constants in the code
examples in this chapter, and find more in these excellent documentation pages:

* [limits.h][http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/climits/]
* [float.h][http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/cfloat/]
