# Operators and Expressions

This section discusses operators and expressions.

Operators are special symbols which produce some result given 1, 2, or 3
values.  They are usually similar to the operators you would see on a four
function calculator, for example `+ - * /` are all operators in C, and they
behave similar to how you might expect.

Unary operators act on 1 operand
Binary operators act on 2 operands
Ternary operators act on 3 operands

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Binary Operators

### Addition (`+`)

This is an example of a addition of two integers:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/addition.c"}
```

Pretty straightforward right?  Ok, let's look at one more example

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/overflow_addition.c"}
```

Huh...  That's weird.

### Overflow

You should remember from the last section that short integers typically can't
hold values greater than `32,767`.  Here we tried to add two short integers to
a value larger than the maximum.  C does not cause any errors in this case, it
merely plays along, and adds them as it would normally.  Except in this case,
there is a carry at the end that the variable simply as no space for, and it
discards it.  This is called overflow.  You should notice then that the result
isn't completely random.  The result is what happens when you add the numbers
normally, except that past 32,767 it loops around to `-32,768`.

However when dealing with signed ints this behavior is not defined in the
standard, and a different compiler on a different machine may produce a
different result!  

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/overflow_addition_exact.c"}
```

However, the behavior is well defined for unsigned integers
meaning you can count on an unsigned integer wrapping to `0` when you exceed
it maximum value via addition.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/overflow_addition_unsigned.c"}
```

In this course, it will generally be okay to use long integers and hope for the
best.

**Question: Can you write code to check if an overflow will occur before
actually performing an addition?**

### Subtraction (`-`)

Subtraction works similar to addition, and has more or less the same overflow
potential.

### Multiplication (`*`)

This is an example of a multiplication of two integers:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/multiplication.c"}
```

As mentioned in the previous section, overflow is still an issue, and it is
even easier to overflow with multiplication.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/multiplication_overflow.c"}
```

**Question: In general, what is the maximum number of bits you would need to
store the product of two N-bit numbers? Hint: How about for N-digit decimal
numbers?**

Multiplication of floating point numbers is similar.  While overflow is still a
possibility, it is less of a concern due to the large range of floating point
numbers.

### Division (`/`)

This is an example of division for two integers:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/division_ints.c"}
```

Note that if you divide two integers, the result itself is an integer, even
if the numbers do not divide evenly.  To find the remainder, subtract the
product of the divisor and the quotient from the dividend as in the code above.

This is an example of division for two floating point numbers:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/division_floats.c"}
```

Huh...  That's weird.

### Floating Point Precision

You can see a strange result.  Even though the two quotients we produce here
should be mathematically they same, they differ.  The reason for this is that
in the second case, we try to store the value `1.0/77777.0`, but this number
is not representable in our format, similar to how `1/7` is not representable
in the decimal format without an infinite number of digits.

This shows an an important lesson: you should generally not check to see if
two floating point numbers are equal, but just that they are close enough, or
if their difference is small.

**Challenge: What kinds of fractions can be represented in finitely many
bits?**

### Remainder or Modulo (`%`)

If you want to get the remainder of a division without actually dividng the
numbers you can use the `%` (modulo) operator.  `a % b` finds the remainder of
`a` divided by `b`.  In most cases this is used to cap at some value create a
repeating sequence as demonstrated below:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/modulo.c"}
```

### Assignemnt Operators

Sometimes you don't want to create a whole new value from an operator, you
only want to update an existing value, this is where assignment operators
come in.  Most binary operators have a corresponding assignment operator as
see in this code snippet.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/assignment_operators.c"}
```

Note that an assignment operator is never necessary, and you can just about
always replace something like `x += 2` with something like `x = x + 2`.  It
is just a bit more concise and easy to follow.

### Relational Operators

Relational operators are used to compare two values.  They are similar to 
operators you are already familiar with from math, so we won't go into too much
depth on each one.

### Less Than (`<`)

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/less_than.c"}
```

From the example, we can see that the operator gives us a 1 if the condition
is true, and a 0 otherwise.  You can also check out the operators `> >= <=`

### Equality (`==`)

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/equality.c"}
```

We can also test for exact equality using the `==` operator as shown above.
Note it is a common mistake to use `=` when checking if two values are equal.
This is especially dangerous because it is not illegal to do so, as we will
speak about in the expressions section.  You can also try out the not equal
operator `!=`

### Logical Operators (`||`, `&&`, `!`)

Logical operators allow us to combine multiple relations into a single truth
value.  For example we can check if a number is in a certain range like the
example below

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/logical.c"}
```

- The `||` (called logical or) operator is true if either side is true.
- The `&&` (called logical and) operator is true if either both sides are true.
- The `!` (called not) operator is true if the following expression is false.

Note that the precedence (meaning the order in which the operators are applied)
is not usually very obvious, so you should generally add extra parentheses if 
you are unsure, as we did above.  We will give a brief overview of precedence
at the end of this section.

### Bitwise Operators (`|`, `&`, `^`, `<<`, `>>`, `~`)

Bitwise operators may be useful if you are trying to make code really fast.
However, I will warn you here that you are usually better off trying to avoid
them, as they often obscure the coder's intention.  A binary operator only 
looks at the raw binary of a value with no regard toward its type.

- The `|` (called bitwise or) operator returns the OR of each bit of both
  values
- The `&` (called bitwise and) operator returns the AND of each bit of both
  values
- The `^` (called bitwise xor) operator returns the XOR of each bit of both
  values
- The `<<` (called shift left) operator returns the same number, but with all
  bits shifted to the left
- The `>>` (called shift right) operator returns the same number, but with all
  bits shifted to the right
- The `~` (called complement) operator returns the same number, but with all
  bits flipped (0 becomes 1, 1 becomes 0)

A common mistake is to use these operators instead of the logical operators
when crafting an expression.  As a general rule unless you're trying to be
really (overly) clever, use the logical operators, not bitwise!

Below shows a quick example of using the shift operators to multiply or divide
by 2.  Note that with modern optimization techniques, this would probably
not be much faster than explicitly multiplying or dividing by 2.

## Unary Operators

Unary operators take a single value and produce a single value.

### Negate

One very common unary operator is negation.  It is very intuitive, and you
would probably understand it without even seeing an example but I will give you
one anyway.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/negate.c"}
```

As is expected, the value given is negated.  Just be careful not to use it with
unsigned values, or you may get strange results.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/negate_unsigned.c"}
```

### Increment and Decrement Operators

Another common unary operator are the increment and decrement operators as
shown below

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/increment_decrement.c"}
```

As you can see, these increment or decrement a value by 1, in place.  Note this
operator can be applied to the front or end of a value as shown below, with
one minor distinction.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/prefix_postfix.c"}
```

If you use `x++` the effect will only be applied after the expression has been
evaluated (meaning it will hold the old value just before the next line of
code).  Otherwise if you use `++x` the update will be immediately applied

## Ternary Operator

The ternary operator is not very often used, and you never really need it.
However you still might see it in the wild so it's worth learning about.  The
ternary operator in C takes three values and produces one.
The basic template for the operator is 

```
(expression) ? (expression if true) : (expression if false)
```

This can be read as follows: Is `expression` true? If so, give `expression if
true`, otherwise: give `expression if false`

The syntax is demonstrated below

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/ternary.c"}
```

### Type Conversions

All of the previous examples we looked at were operators on the same types,
however it's perfectly valid to use an operator on two different types like
in this example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/operator_types.c"}
```

Here we combine the integer `5` with the character `'0'` viw the `+` operator.
Conversions will automatically take place if a more "narrow" type is being
automatically converted to a less "narrow" type.  There are two automatic
conversions taking place in the above code.  First is the conversion of `'0'`
from `char` to `int` which happens when we add it to the `int` `a`.  Then,
Because we are assigning the expression `a + '0'` to a `char`, we are
converting from `int` to `char`.

Note that when we print the value stored in `b` we either interpret it as a
character (`%c`) or an integer (`%d`) which changes how the value is displayed.

The general rules (from "The C Programming Language") are shown here:

1. If either operand is long double, convert the other to long double.
2. Otherwise, if either operand is double, convert the other to double.
3. Otherwise, if either operand is float, convert the other to float.
4. Otherwise, convert char and short to int.
5. Then, if either operand is long, convert the other to long.

### Casting

Rather than creating a new variable to perform a conversion, you can also
`cast` a value on the fly.  For example, if you want to perform a floating
point division rather than an integer division.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/operator_types_cast.c"}
```

The above code casts `a` to a `float` before performing the division and so
`b` is automatically converted as per the previous rules, and the result
is a `float`.

## Expressions

Most lines of code we have seen so far are expressions.  An expression is
simply any combination of variables, constants, and operators, which we
have mostly finished explaining by now.  Here are some examples of expressions:

```
123 + 25
123 * 25 - 13
a * b + c
a * (-c)
a * b == c * d
(a == b) && (c == d)
```

When you try to interpet these, you should check how each part of the
expression "resolves" to a value to understand it.  For example in the last
expression, first check if `(a == b)` is true, then check if `(c == d)` is true
and then check if they are both true to check if the expression is true.  You
can replace each part of the expression one piece at a time to break it down
and understand it.  In order to know which part the computer will evaluate
first, you have to look at precedence.

```
() [] -> .
! ~ ++ -- + - * (type)
* / %
+ -
<< >>
< <= > >=
== !=
&
^
|
&&
||
?:
= += -= *= /= %= &= ^= |= <<= >>=
,
```

Note that it is similar to the PEMDAS system we all know at love, but with a
lot more rules.  As always, use extra parentheses to make your intention clear,
don't cram too many operators into one expression, and experiment with your
code to help get it right.
